---
path: '/species/birds/perching_birds/134'
title: 'Louisiana seaside sparrow'
---

# Louisiana seaside sparrow

### Ammodramus maritimus fisheri

<div id="TopSection">



<div>

### Overall vulnerability:

<div class="vulnerability vulnerability-low">Low</div>

### Conservation status:

Species of Greatest Conservation Need

</div>
</div>

## General Information

The Louisiana seaside sparrow is one of multiple subspecies of seaside sparrows to occur in the state, with a western range extending from the Florida panhandle through central Texas.  The plumage of these small birds varies slightly by subspecies – the Gulf populations often have yellow streaks atop their greyish brown feathers.  Seaside sparrows feed on insects, spiders, crustaceans and seeds found within the marsh grasses where they nest on the ground.

<hr />

## Habitat Requirements

**Total habitat within Florida:** 2,367 hectares (modeled)

Louisiana seaside sparrows inhabit the vast expanses of halophytic grasses or rushes that grow in intertidal salt marsh habitats along the coast.

**TODO: habitat crosslinks**

**TODO: habitat map (if exists)**

<hr />

## Climate Impacts

As a grass nesting species, the Louisiana seaside sparrow is extremely vulnerable to many threats that are common in coastal areas including habitat inundation from sea level rise.  Seaside sparrow nests in marsh grasses near the coast are easily destroyed by extreme weather events, human disturbance, predation, and even hide tides, all of which are likely to increase as climate change accelerates.  Given the hazardous conditions to which they are accustomed, it is not uncommon for these birds to start over with new nests following a nest failure early in the season.  However, an especially bad year or a severe storm event late in the season can destroy seaside sparrow clutches for the year, negatively impacting the bird’s already small population.  Habitat fragmentation stemming from changes in coastal development patterns linked to climate change is also likely to be a concern for this subspecies.

[More information about general climate impacts to species in Florida](/impacts/species).


#### This species is expected to be impacted by sea level rise:

- 3 meters of sea level rise: 65% of habitat (1,529 ha)
- 1 meter of sea level rise: 40% of habitat (946 ha)
    

<hr />

## Vulnerability Assessment(s)

The overall vulnerability level (Low) was based on the following assessment(s).
#### 
<div class="vulnerability-header">
<h3><a href="/impacts/vulnerability/sivva/species">Standardized Index of Vulnerability and Value Assessment</a></h3>
<div class="vulnerability vulnerability-moderate">Moderately vulnerable</div>
</div> 

The primary factors contributing to vulnerability of the Louisiana seaside sparrow are sea level rise, erosion, presence of barriers, runoff and storm surge, alterations to biotic interactions, and synergies with development.


<hr />

## Adaptation Strategies

- Conservation of existing salt marsh habitat will allow the Louisiana seaside sparrow the best chance of increasing and maintaining a healthy population on the Gulf coast as climate change begins to accelerate.  This includes controlling existing stressors, such as habitat loss and coastal development.

- Conserving healthy future coastal marsh habitat as sea levels rise and human communities begin to shift is important for this species.

- Protecting migratory corridors if salt marsh habitat migrates inland is an important adaptation strategy for the Louisiana seaside sparrow.  Although a significant portion of current habitat is expected to be lost to sea level rise, new areas of suitable habitat may emerge inland if conservation efforts support their natural transition.

[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).

<hr />


## Additional Resources

- [Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission Species Profile](http://legacy.myfwc.com/bba/docs/bba_sesp.pdf)
