---
path: '/species/birds/perching_birds/138'
title: 'Mangrove cuckoo'
---

# Mangrove cuckoo
### *Coccyzus minor*



**Conservation status:** Species of Greatest Conservation Need

**TODO:vulnerability**

This elusive neotropical bird can be found in the coastal mangrove forests of south Florida.  Beyond its range within the state, the cuckoo’s distribution includes the Caribbean, coastal Mexico and Central America.  The mangrove cuckoo is a medium-sized bird with dull grey feathers.  It is most easily spotted by its long tail dotted with white spots and the black, mask-shaped markings on its face.  Mangrove cuckoos are notoriously quiet – the species rarely vocalizes and is known for its unique foraging behavior of sitting still and silent on a branch, only turning its head slightly to watch and wait for prey.

    
## Habitat Requirements

Mangrove cuckoos prefer the highly dense vegetation often found in black and red mangrove forests.  They can also be found in dense areas of rockland hammock and scrub.

## Climate Impacts

As a species closely tied to coastal forests in the southern most portion of the state, the mangrove cuckoo is highly vulnerable to sea level rise.  Mangrove habitats near the coast are threatened by extreme weather events, eventual inundation from sea level rise and coastal development and armoring.  As humans attempt to adapt to climate change and protect the coastline, habitat fragmentation stemming from changes in land use is likely.  While mangrove forests may naturally migrate inland under climate change and sea level rise, human development is likely to interfere with this process, posing a threat to mangrove dependent species like the cuckoo.

## Adaptation Strategies

- Conservation of existing mangrove habitat will allow the mangrove cuckoo the best chance of increasing and maintaining a healthy population in Florida as climate change begins to accelerate.  This includes controlling existing stressors, such as habitat loss and coastal development.

- Conserving healthy future mangrove habitat as sea levels rise and human communities begin to shift is important for this species.

- Protecting migratory corridors if mangrove habitat migrates inland and northward is an important adaptation strategy for this species.  Assisted migration to optimal mangrove habitat northward from the bird’s current range in a future climate is a possible strategy.


[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).
