---
path: '/species/birds/perching_birds/143'
title: 'Red-cockaded woodpecker'
---

# Red-cockaded woodpecker
### *Picoides borealis*



**Conservation status:** Federally Endangered

**TODO:vulnerability**

This rare black and white bird lives only in old growth pine forests in the American southeast.  The bird’s common name comes from the red cockade found on the male – although this small red streak found above the cheek is rarely visible.  The red-cockaded woodpecker eats a diet of insects, arthropods and seeds and nests in the spring.  These birds are cooperative breeders – between two and four adult “helpers” assist the mated pair with incubating eggs.

    
## Habitat Requirements

Red-cockaded woodpeckers have highly specific habitat requirements.  These birds do not seek out dead trees as do many species of woodpecker but rather excavate nesting holes only in living pines with red heart disease, a fungus that affects the trees heartwood.  The disease is not common in trees younger than 70 years old, explaining the bird’s proclivity for old growth pine.

## Climate Impacts

The red-cockaded woodpecker’s highly specific habitat needs leave it extremely vulnerable to additional habitat loss and fragmentation from climate change.  Few nesting sites remain as most old growth pine forest was lost to logging over the last century.  Fire suppression exacerbated by climate change and shifting community dynamics can also degrade woodpecker habitat.

## Adaptation Strategies

- Conserving remaining areas of old growth pine forest is a critical first step for this species.

- Implementing an appropriate fire regime is important for the red-cockaded woodpecker.  Climate change is likely to make prescribed fire more challenging as optimal burning conditions become increasingly rare, thus implementing a consistent fire management regime early is crucial.

- As controlled burning becomes more challenging in a changing climate, other habitat management strategies such as mechanical thinning may need to be pursued to conserve woodpecker habitat.

- Creating artificial woodpecker nesting cavities in living trees is one strategy that can be considered if suitable habitat becomes further limited or degraded due to climate change.


[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).


## Additional Resources

- [Federal Recovery Plan](https://www.fws.gov/rcwrecovery/files/RecoveryPlan/finalrecoveryplan.pdf)

- [Multi-Species Recovery Plan for South Florida](https://ecos.fws.gov/docs/recovery_plan/sfl_msrp/SFL_MSRP_Species.pdf)

- [FWC Management Plan](http://www.myfwc.com/media/214360/RCW.pdf)
