---
path: '/species/reptiles/lizards_skinks/110'
title: 'Cedar Key mole skink'
---

# Cedar Key mole skink

### Eumeces egregius insularis

<div id="TopSection">



<div>

### Overall vulnerability:

This species was not assessed for vulnerability.

### Conservation status:

Species of Greatest Conservation Need

</div>
</div>

## General Information

This small brown and orange skink has the smallest distribution of any Florida lizard.  The Cedar Key mole skink is a subspecies endemic to only seven tiny islands in the Gulf of Mexico near Cedar Key.  The skink is thought to have caught a ride to the islands on drifting vegetation or to be the remnants of an ancient population that became isolated once the islands disconnected from the mainland as water levels rose.  The Cedar Key mole skink relies on a diet of small insects and arthropods on the islands it inhabits.

<hr />

## Habitat Requirements

**Total habitat within Florida:** 283 hectares (modeled)

The Cedar Key mole skink inhabits the shoreline on the islands it has colonized, preferring to seek shelter under sand and tidal debris.

**TODO: habitat crosslinks**

**TODO: habitat map (if exists)**

<hr />

## Climate Impacts

As an island endemic subspecies, the Cedar Key mole skink is highly vulnerable to sea level rise.  The lizard’s small population and very narrow distribution will make it a challenge for the Cedar Key mole skink to adapt to increasingly harsh island conditions.  Sea level rise, coastal erosion and increasingly strong or frequent storm events are likely to be a concern.  Like many island subspecies in Florida, assisted relocation to the mainland is not an option if the goal is to preserve the genetic integrity of the Cedar Key subspecies of mole skink.

[More information about general climate impacts to species in Florida](/impacts/species).


#### This species is expected to be impacted by sea level rise:

- 3 meters of sea level rise: 91% of habitat (257 ha)
- 1 meter of sea level rise: 58% of habitat (163 ha)

[More information about sea level rise impacts on species in Florida](/impacts/species/slr).
    

<hr />

## Vulnerability Assessment(s)

This species was not assessed for vulnerability.

<hr />

## Adaptation Strategies

- Given the risk of genetic swamping if the Cedar Key mole skink begins to overlap with other subspecies, assisted migration to a more isolated area or developing a captive breeding population may be the best adaptation strategy for this species if sea level rise poses too great a threat to the island populations.

[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).

<hr />
