---
path: '/species/mammals/rodents/149'
title: 'Sanibel Island rice rat'
---

# Sanibel Island rice rat
### *Oryzomys palustris sanibeli*



**Conservation status:** State Threatened

**TODO:vulnerability**

The Sanibel Island rice rat is a subspecies of the rice rat endemic to Sanibel Island, Florida.  This species has a brown back and a cream-colored belly and can reach an approximate length of 10 inches.  Rice rats are primarily nocturnal and will spend their evening hours foraging for insects, crabs, snails and plants throughout their large home ranges.  This species breeds throughout the year and has a short reproductive cycle – juveniles reach maturity at about 50 days and wild rice rats typically live for less than one year.

    
## Habitat Requirements

The Sanibel Island rice rat is semi-aquatic and inhabits coastal and freshwater marshes, swamps, and hammocks on Sanibel Island.

## Climate Impacts

This endemic subspecies is currently highly threatened by habitat loss and degradation, predation by feral cats, and fire suppression made necessary by nearby urbanization.  These existing threats coupled with extremely high vulnerability to sea level rise, make it likely that the Sanibel Island rice rat will be significantly impacted by climate change.  Additionally, this species is restricted from migration due to the geographic barriers of its island home and its genetic similarity to the mainland species of rice rat.  If Sanibel Island rats expanded beyond their limited range, they would likely be genetically swamped by similar mainland rats.

## Adaptation Strategies

- Conservation of existing habitat will allow the Sanibel Island rice rat the best chance of recovering and maintaining a healthy population as climate change begins to accelerate.

- As sea level rise may eventually become too great a threat for the Sanibel Island rice rat in its current habitat and range, developing and maintaining a captive breeding population and assisted migration to a new location absent of similar rice rats are strategies to consider for this species.

- Controlling existing threats such as feral cats is an important first-step in increasing rice rat population resilience and ability to adapt.


[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).


## Additional Resources

- [FWC Imperiled Species Management Plan (ISMP)](http://myfwc.com/media/4133167/Floridas-Imperiled-Species-Management-Plan-2016-2026.pdf)

- [FWC Biological Status Review](http://myfwc.com/media/2273382/Sanibel-Island-Rice-Rat-BSR.pdf)

- [FWC Species Action Plan](http://myfwc.com/media/2718861/Sanibel-Island-Rice-Rat-Species-Action-Plan-Final-Draft.pdf)
