---
path: '/species/mammals/rodents/161'
title: 'Southeastern beach mouse'
---

# Southeastern beach mouse
### *Peromyscus polionotus niveiventris*



**Conservation status:** Federally Threatened

**TODO:vulnerability**

Very little is known about the life history of the Southeastern beach mouse, a subspecies of the small old-field mouse, endemic to the dunes of Florida’s Atlantic coast.  The beach mouse can reach a length of 5 inches and has grayish-brown back and white belly.  The Southeastern beach mouse is dependent on dune habitat for food and shelter, burrowing under dune vegetation and eating a diet of insects, seeds and fruit.   The species is monogamous and has the fast-reproductive cycle common of small mammals.  Breeding season typically occurs during the early winter months but can continue year-round in optimal food and climate conditions.

    
## Habitat Requirements

The Southeastern beach mouse relies exclusively on sand dune habitat on the Atlantic coast of the Florida peninsula from between Volusia and Martin counties.

## Climate Impacts

As a coastal endemic subspecies, the Southeastern beach mouse faces substantial threats related to climate change.  First, sea level rise is a grave impending threat to the beach mouse’s island habitat.  Additionally, this species faces many of the same existing threats common to coastal or island species: habitat loss and degradation from coastal development, barriers to migration, habitat disturbance from recreational use and high mortality from non-native predators.  These existing threats are likely to be magnified by the increasingly severe storm events and shifting conditions of a changing climate.

## Adaptation Strategies

- Conservation of existing beach habitat will allow the beach mouse the best chance of recovering and maintaining a healthy population as climate change begins to accelerate.  This includes controlling existing stressors, such as reducing populations of non-native predators.

- As sea level rise may eventually become too great a threat for the Southeastern beach mouse in its current habitat, developing and maintaining a captive breeding population is a strategy to consider for this coastal endemic subspecies.


[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).


## Additional Resources

- [Federal Recovery Plan](https://ecos.fws.gov/docs/recovery_plan/930923b.pdf)

- [Multi-Species Recovery Plan for South Florida](https://ecos.fws.gov/docs/recovery_plan/sfl_msrp/SFL_MSRP_Species.pdf)
