---
path: '/species/mammals/rodents/208'
title: 'Gambian giant pouched rat'
---

# Gambian giant pouched rat
### *Cricetomys gambianus*



**Conservation status:** Non-native

**TODO:vulnerability**

A non-native species to Florida, the Gambian pouched rat is the largest rat in the world. This rat can weigh up to 9 pounds and is usually between 20 and 35 inches in length. These nocturnal rodents typically spend their time on the ground, although they are expert climbers.  In Florida, this species is limited to Grassy Key and eats a diet consisting of insects, snails, nuts, seeds, and fruits. However, like many rats they are opportunistic feeders and are known to eat pet food whenever available.  Gambian pouched rats are prohibited in the state of Florida, and efforts to prevent their spread to the mainland are in effect.  The rat’s potential spread throughout Florida is a concern because of their capability to become invasive, spread disease and become agricultural pests.

    
## Habitat Requirements

The Gambian pouched rat inhabits natural holes, crevices, hollow trees, and areas around human dwellings. In Florida, these rats are often attracted to human dwellings by the scents of food and garbage.

## Climate Impacts

The Gambian pouched rat is prohibited in the state of Florida and efforts to eradicate the small Grassy Key population are underway.  Ecological transformations fueled by climate change may create an environment where invasive species like the Gambian pouched rat can easily thrive and spread, placing strain on native ecosystems.  As an opportunistic species native to a very warm climate, the pouched rat may adapt well to a changing climate and outcompete native species.

## Adaptation Strategies

- As a nonnative and potentially harmful, invasive species, the goal is to eradicate Gambian pouched rats from Florida rather than to help the species adapt to a changing climate.  Strict efforts to remove wild rats from Grassy Key and prevent their spread to other areas should be continued.


[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).
