---
path: '/species/mammals/rodents/231'
title: 'Sherman’s short-tailed shrew'
---

# Sherman’s short-tailed shrew

### Blarina shermani

<div id="TopSection">



<div>

### Overall vulnerability:

<div class="vulnerability vulnerability-low">Low</div>

### Conservation status:

State Threatened

</div>
</div>

## General Information

With a body length of about 4 inches, Sherman’s short-tailed shrew is larger than other species in Florida.  This rodent has a small range limited to Collier and Lee counties in southwest Florida.  Short-tailed shrews eat a diet of ants, beetle larvae and butterflies and typically have two annual breeding seasons, both between March and November.

<hr />

## Habitat Requirements



Sherman’s short-tailed shrews prefer dense herbaceous habits with a floor of damp soil and debris.  Swamps, hydric hammocks and pinelands are common habitat types for this species.

**TODO: habitat crosslinks**

**TODO: habitat map (if exists)**

<hr />

## Climate Impacts

Sherman’s short-tailed shrews are susceptible to sea level rise in their coastal range.  Additionally, this species faces many of the same existing threats common to coastal species: habitat loss and degradation from development, barriers to migration, habitat disturbance from recreational use and high mortality from non-native predators.

[More information about general climate impacts to species in Florida](/impacts/species).



<hr />

## Vulnerability Assessment(s)

The overall vulnerability level (Low) was based on the following assessment(s).
#### 
<div class="vulnerability-header">
<h3><a href="/impacts/vulnerability/sivva/species">Standardized Index of Vulnerability and Value Assessment</a></h3>
<div class="vulnerability vulnerability-moderate">Slightly to Moderately vulnerable</div>
</div> 

The primary factors contributing to vulnerability of the Sherman's short-tailed shrew are sea level rise and minimal habitat protection.


<hr />

## Adaptation Strategies

- Conservation of existing habitat will allow this shrew the best chance of recovering and maintaining a healthy population as climate change begins to accelerate.  This includes controlling existing stressors, such as reducing populations of non-native predators.

[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).

<hr />


## Additional Resources

- [Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission Species Profile](https://myfwc.com/wildlifehabitats/profiles/mammals/land/shermans-short-tailed-shrew/)
