---
path: '/species/mammals/rodents/315'
title: 'Homosassa Shrew'
---

# Homosassa Shrew

### Sorex longirostris eionis

<div id="TopSection">



<div>

### Conservation status:

State Species of Special Concern

### Overall vulnerability:

Very Low

</div>
</div>

The Homosassa Shrew is a small brown mammal that weighs about two ounces and reaches only four inches in length. Almost half of the shrew’s diet consists of spiders, with the rest consisting of small invertebrates. These secretive animals spend their time foraging in leaf-litter and mole tunnels. Homosassa Shrews breed between March and October, with litter sizes being between one and six offspring. These Shrews have short lifespans of about one year, usually only surviving one winter, and breeding the following summer.

<hr />

## Habitat Requirements



Homosassa Shrews can be found from north Florida to central Florida in a variety of habitat types. Little is known about the specific habitat preferences of this species but they have been found in habitats including hardwood swamps, dry prairie and working lands. Within their habitats, Homosassa shrews spend their time foraging for food in woody debris on the uppermost soil layer.

**TODO: habitat crosslinks**

**TODO: habitat map (if exists)**

<hr />

## Climate Impacts

Inundation from sea level rise is a concern for this species, especially in coastal areas. Severe weather patterns can also impact the small Homosassa shrew. This species is currently highly stressed by habitat loss and fragmentation and this threat is likely to intensify as land use patterns shift due to climate change.

[More information about general climate impacts to species in Florida](/impacts/species).



<hr />

## Vulnerability Assessment(s)

The overall vulnerability level (Very Low) was based on the following assessment(s).
#### 
<div class="vulnerability-header">
<h3><a href="/impacts/vulnerability/sivva/species">Standardized Index of Vulnerability and Value Assessment</a></h3>
<b class="slight">Slightly vulnerable</b>
</div> 

The primary factor contributing to vulnerability of the Homosassa shrew is minimal habitat protection.


<hr />

## Adaptation Strategies

- Monitoring for population health and existing stressors is an important first step for this species.  This many include managing existing threats such as predation from feral cats to increase population resilience at the onset of climate change.

- Research aimed at increasing knowledge of optimal Homosassa shrew habitat will help conservation practitioners prioritize their efforts in the context climate change.

[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).

<hr />


## Additional Resources

- [Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission Species Profile](https://myfwc.com/wildlifehabitats/profiles/mammals/land/homosassa-shrew/)
