---
path: '/species/birds/waterbirds/139'
title: 'Mottled duck'
---

# Mottled duck
### *Anas fulvigula fulvigula*



**Conservation status:** Species of Greatest Conservation Need

**TODO:vulnerability**

The mottled duck, also commonly known as the Florida mallard, is a member of a worldwide suite of closely related ducks known as the mallard complex.  The Florida mottled duck is one of few non-migratory ducks in North America and is unique to peninsular Florida.  The mottled duck is similar in appearance to a mallard but can be distinguished by its brown head, rather than the characteristic iridescent green of a mallard.  This species is omnivorous and eats a varied diet of insects, mollusks, small fish and plant matter.  Females locate their nests within patches of dense vegetation during the early spring months and bring their new ducklings to water only 48 hours after hatching.

    
## Habitat Requirements

Mottled ducks inhabit a variety of freshwater and brackish habitats in the state including marshes, ponds, canals, ditches, and mosquito impoundments.

## Climate Impacts

Habitat loss and fragmentation are current threats for the mottled duck that are likely to intensify under climate change.  Changes to the hydrological cycle, precipitation patterns, predator prey dynamics, salination and water chemistry are all likely to impact mottled duck habitat in the state.  Many of the freshwater habitats favored by the mottled duck are highly vulnerable to sea level rise and salt water encroachment.

## Adaptation Strategies

- Conserving areas of new potential habitat where freshwater marsh and floodplain migration may occur is likely to be a more appropriate strategy for the mottled duck than allowing or promoting a shift in community composition within existing habitat.   While specific changes in precipitation patterns under climate change are difficult to predict, some areas in the state are expected to become wetter while others will become drier and more prone to drought.  As climate change accelerates, mottled ducks may need to follow these precipitation shifts to find adequate wetland habitat, moving away from areas of current habitat that will become drier.

- Monitoring natural community shifts to prioritize areas for conservation is an important first step in ensuring duck habitat can be conserved in a future climate.  As locations of prime duck habitat are likely to shift under climate change, monitoring can help conservationists get ahead of natural shifts and understand where to best focus their efforts.  This strategy is also important to mitigate extensive habitat loss from altered human land use patterns in a changing climate.


[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).
