---
path: '/species/birds/waterbirds/226'
title: 'Purple swamphen'
---

# Purple swamphen
### *Porphyrio porphyrio*



**Conservation status:** Non-native

**TODO:vulnerability**

This stout and colorful waterbird can be identified by its indigo feathers and red, curved beak.  Purple swamphens are native to the Iberian Peninsula.  The nonnative south Florida population of this species likely originated from captive urban birds.  Purple swamphens are presently expanding their range northward in Florida.  These birds make loud bleating calls and are notably clumsy in flight.  Swamphens nest in swamp or marsh vegetation on the ground and eat a primarily vegetarian diet of wetland plant matter, supplemented with occasional reptiles, amphibians and insects.

    
## Habitat Requirements

Purple swamphens inhabit a variety of aquatic habitats since their expansion in Florida including floodplains, marshes, ponds, rivers and streams.

## Climate Impacts

The freshwater marshes that form the bulk of purple swamphen habitat in Florida are vulnerable to changing hydrological cycles, water chemistry and salinity.  Some areas of swamphen habitat in coastal south Florida may become inundated by sea level rise.  As a nonnative species, purple swamphens may expand further in a changing climate and impact native species including wetland plants, reptiles and amphibians.

## Adaptation Strategies

- As a nonnative species representing a potential threat to native wildlife, the goal is to reduce and ultimately eradicate purple swamphens from Florida rather than to help the species adapt to a changing climate.


[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).
