---
path: '/habitats/marine/52111'
title: 'Keys Tidal Rock Barren'
---

# Keys Tidal Rock Barren

### within Estuarine/Marine (system wide)

<div id="TopSection">



<div>

### Overall vulnerability:

<div class="vulnerability vulnerability-extreme">Very High</div>

### Area:

-   3,448 hectares within Florida (modeled)

-   2,811 hectares (82%) is located on public lands



</div>
</div>

## General Information

Keys tidal rock barren is a flat rockland with exposed limestone in supratidal zone.  it is inundated by salt water only during extreme high tides.  This community is restricted to the Florida keys on limestone bedrock along shores facing both Florida Bay and the Straits of Florida.  It consists of mainly herbaceous vegetation of upper tidal marsh species and stunted shrubs and tree, including buttonwood, perennial glasswort, saltwort, seaside oxeye, saltgrass, seashore dropseed, and marsh fimbry. Fire does not occur in this community.



**TODO: map (if exists)**

### Species

Lower Keys marsh rabbit

<hr />

## Impacts of Climate Change

The Keys tidal rock barren community is at high risk of complete habitat loss, with 100% of the current area likely to be inundated by a 1 m rise in sea level.  The plants found here are already highly adapted to isolated patches and high salinity levels.  However, due to the isolated and patchy nature of this community and its association with flat exposed limestone, it is not likely that it will be able to successfully migrate inland to new suitable sites as sea levels rise.


#### This habitat is expected to be impacted by sea level rise:

- 3 meters of sea level rise: 100% of area (3,446 ha)
- 1 meter of sea level rise: 100% of area (3,445 ha)
    

[More information about general climate impacts to ecosystems and habitats in Florida](/impacts/habitats).

### Impacts to Species

The plant species composition may not change much as the typical plants are already adapted to salt spray and some inundation by salt water.  This community is known more for its uniqueness and rare plant species, including the Florida semaphore cactus.

[More information about general climate impacts to species in Florida](/impacts/species).

## Other Non-climate Threats

nan

## Adaptation Strategies

#### Monitoring

- Conduct surveys to detect new infestations of invasive species and presence of new species.
- Monitor species diversity and habitat transition over time in response to sea level rise and changing climatological conditions.


#### Education/Outreach

- Work with volunteers to control invasive species.
- Work with communities and landowners to choose native vegetation in favor of non-native vegetation.
- Provide education and incentives for neighboring landowners to reduce critical invasive plants and assist in detection of new species.
- Work with local communities to remove dumped debris, e.g., construction materials, landscape debris, automobile parts, trash.


#### Policy

- Provide greater regulation and enforcement of recreational use and access restrictions.
- Reduce public access to areas as they become stressed/impacted by climate change and more susceptible to non-climate stressors.


#### Planning

- Plan timing of restoration activities to avoid impacts on rare species during critical life history phases and during times of increased stress due to impacts from climate change.
- Identify areas particularly vulnerable to loss or transition under climate change and develop management strategies and approaches for adaptation.
- Incorporate climate change considerations into new and future revisions of species and area management plans.


#### Restoration

- Remove existing invasive species.
- Remove new invasive species before they become established.


#### Protection

- Develop ex-situ living collections of unique/endemic plant species with partners such as botanic gardens and arboreta.
- Consider relocating rare species to higher elevation areas when critical populations may be affected by impacts from sea level rise (e.g., inundation).
- Preserve remaining keys tidal rock barrens and buffers that will enhance species migration corridors.
- Reduce or eliminate mosquito spraying on and adjacent to keys tidal rock barrens..




[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).

## Additional Resources

 - [Florida Natural Areas Inventory Profile](http://www.fnai.org/PDF/NC/Keys_Tidal_Rock_Barren_Final_2010.pdf)
