---
path: '/species/birds/319'
title: 'Marian’s marsh wren'
---

<content-header icon="perching_birds" title="Marian’s marsh wren" subtitle="Cistothorus palustris marianae"></content-header>

<div id="TopSection">



<div>

### Overall vulnerability:

<div class="vulnerability vulnerability-low">Low</div>



### Conservation status:

State Threatened

</div>
</div>

## General Information

With a range stretching along Florida’s northern Gulf coast and into Alabama, this species is a small wren with a dark brown back and a cream-colored belly. Marian’s marsh wrens typically nest and shelter in cordgrasses along tidal creeks. Males will fly over the habitat, showing territorial dominance to court females. After mating, the birds will nest in colonies of small dome-shaped structures. Female birds will tend to the nests, as males do not take part in the incubation or care of the offspring. Incubation for this species is brief, lasting only eleven to twelve days. Marian’s marsh wrens typically eat insects, invertebrates, and spiders.

<hr />

## Habitat Requirements

These wrens inhabit coastal salt marshes.  The salt marshes form a transitional zone between marine and terrestrial communities, where this nonmigratory species lives. Within their small geographic range, Marian’s marsh wrens prefer to shelter in cordgrasses and black needle rush.

**TODO: habitat crosslinks**

<hr />

## Climate Impacts

The small geographic range and coastal habitat of Marian’s marsh wren, increases the susceptibility of this bird to many climate-related threats.  The marsh wren’s habitat is highly vulnerable to sea level rise and changing weather patterns, more extreme temperatures and an increased occurrence of intense storms pose direct threats to nesting marsh wrens. Habitat lost to encroaching human development is an existing threat that is likely to worsen with climate change.

[More information about general climate impacts to species in Florida](/impacts/species).



<hr />

## Vulnerability Assessment(s)

The overall vulnerability level (Low) was based on the following assessment(s).
#### 
<div class="vulnerability-header">
<h3><a href="/impacts/vulnerability/sivva/species">Standardized Index of Vulnerability and Value Assessment</a></h3>
<div class="vulnerability vulnerability-moderate">Moderately vulnerable</div>
</div> 

The primary factors contributing to vulnerability of the Marian's marsh wren are sea level rise, erosion, presence of barriers, habitat fragmentation, runoff and storm surge, alterations to biotic interactions, and synergies with development.


<hr />

## Adaptation Strategies

- Restoration of existing habitat using dredge soil is a first step to increase habitat and species resilience to the early impacts of climate change.

- Protecting salt marsh migration corridors will allow the wren to more easily move inland as sea level rise occurs.  Areas further from coastal development where the Marian’s marsh wren has the highest chance of success should be prioritized.

[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).

<hr />


## Additional Resources

- [Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission Species Profile](https://myfwc.com/wildlifehabitats/profiles/birds/songbirds/marians-marsh-wren/)
