---
path: '/species/birds/329'
title: 'Worthington’s marsh wren'
---

<content-header icon="perching_birds" title="Worthington’s marsh wren" subtitle="Cistothorus palustris griseus">
</content-header>

<div id="TopSection">



<div>

### Overall vulnerability:

<div class="vulnerability vulnerability-low">Very Low</div>



### Conservation status:

State Threatened

</div>
</div>

## General Information

The Worthington’s Marsh Wren is a small perching bird that can reach lengths of up to 5 inches found in the northeastern tip of the state. Worthington’s Marsh Wrens typically feed on insects, spiders, and invertebrates. Marsh Wrens nest in colonies in tall grasses alongside meandering creeks. In the spring months, males will court females through songs and territorial displays. Egg incubation lasts between 11 and 15 days, during which the females care for the nest.

<hr />

## Habitat Requirements

Worthington Marsh Wrens inhabit salt marshes and are typically found near the St. Johns River in northeast Florida.

**TODO: habitat crosslinks**

<hr />

## Climate Impacts

Habitat destruction is the largest current threat Worthington’s marsh wren populations face. Sea level rise is likely to exacerbate this threat – over three quarters of salt marsh habitat in the state is expected to be lost with 3 meters of sea level rise.  Increasingly severe storm events fueled by climate change can also destroy marsh wren habitat and nesting sites.

[More information about general climate impacts to species in Florida](/impacts/species).



<hr />

## Vulnerability Assessment(s)

The overall vulnerability level (Very Low) was based on the following assessment(s).
#### 
<div class="vulnerability-header">
<h3><a href="/impacts/vulnerability/sivva/species">Standardized Index of Vulnerability and Value Assessment</a></h3>
<div class="vulnerability vulnerability-slight">Slightly vulnerable</div>
</div> 

The primary factors contributing to vulnerability of the Worthington's marsh wren are sea level rise, erosion, presence of barriers, habitat fragmentation, runoff and storm surge, alterations to biotic interactions, and synergies with development.


<hr />

## Adaptation Strategies

- Conservation of existing marsh habitat will allow the marsh wren the best chance of maintaining a healthy population as climate change begins to accelerate.  This may include restoration and assisted migration to areas of unoccupied habitat.

- Prevent reduction of contiguous salt marsh habitats by removing artificial barriers that divide the marshes.  Protecting salt marsh migration corridors will allow the bird to more easily move inland with marsh habitat as sea level rise occurs.

[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).

<hr />


## Additional Resources

- [Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission Species Profile](https://myfwc.com/wildlifehabitats/profiles/birds/songbirds/worthington-s-marsh-wren/)
