---
path: '/species/amphibians/312'
title: 'Georgia blind salamander'
---

<content-header icon="salamanders" title="Georgia blind salamander" subtitle="Haideotriton wallacei">
</content-header>

<div id="TopSection">



<div>

### Overall vulnerability:

This species was not assessed for vulnerability.



### Conservation status:

State Threatened

</div>
</div>

## General Information

This eyeless salamander is adapted to the dark caves of its tiny range in the Florida panhandle and south Georgia.  Georgia blind salamanders have a white body with a yellow or pink tint and reach a maximum length of only 2 inches.  The salamander’s flattened head is set off by bright red external gills.  These salamanders eat a diet of small aquatic invertebrates found within the caves they inhabit.

<hr />

## Habitat Requirements

The Georgia blind salamander lives in complete darkness is underground streams and pools inside caves and sinkholes.

**TODO: habitat crosslinks**

<hr />

## Climate Impacts

Georgia blind salamanders are highly vulnerable to hydrological changes including periods of drought or drops in the water table that could dry up their fragile watery habitat.  These salamanders are also likely to be impacted by changing water chemistry, increased salination, pollution and runoff, all of which are likely to increase with a changing climate.

[More information about general climate impacts to species in Florida](/impacts/species).



<hr />

## Vulnerability Assessment(s)

This species was not assessed for vulnerability.

<hr />

## Adaptation Strategies

- Conservation and restoration of existing habitat is critical to increase Georgia blind salamander resilience at the onset of intensifying climate change.  Limiting nearby sources of pollution and runoff is especially important for these salamanders.

- Given the small range and fragility of this cave-dwelling species, developing a captive breeding program for possible reintroduction in the event of local extirpation should be considered for this species.

[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).

<hr />


## Additional Resources

- [Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission Species Profile](https://myfwc.com/wildlifehabitats/profiles/amphibians/georgia-blind-salamander/)
