---
path: '/species/amphibians/frogs/234'
title: 'Squirrel treefrog'
---

# Squirrel treefrog
### *Hyla squirella*



**Conservation status:** Not Listed

**TODO:vulnerability**

These average-sized tree frogs come in a range of colors and patterns, which can make them difficult to identify.  They can be found throughout the coastal plains of the southeastern United States.  Squirrel tree frogs eat a diet of insects and breed during summer rains, capable of laying up to 1,000 eggs in shallow, ephemeral ponds.  They are sometimes called “rain frogs” in reference to their habit of calling loudly after summer showers.  The tadpole stage of this species lasts for approximately 45 days.

    
## Habitat Requirements

Squirrel tree frogs prefer damp environments that offer food and shelter.  Swamps, marshes and the edges of ponds and rivers make excellent habitat.

## Climate Impacts

Squirrel tree frogs are vulnerable to the hydrological changes, increased periods of drought, salination from sea level rise, and increase in severe storm events expected with climate change.  The ephemeral wetlands and shallow breeding pools this species relies on are especially vulnerable to extended periods of drought. The need for increased fire suppression if controlled burns become more difficult to implement in a changing climate is also a concern as frequent fire prevents encroachment from vegetation that dehydrates tree frog habitat.

## Adaptation Strategies

- Restoration efforts to promote resilience and preserve the integrity of wetlands during increased periods of drought and hydrological change should be pursued.

- Monitoring population levels and hydrological conditions is important for this species.  Strategies such as lining breeding ponds and wetland areas to maintain hydration in the event of a significant period of drought and drop of the water table, may help the squirrel tree frog adapt to harsh conditions triggered by climate change.

- Applying an adequate fire regime to gopher frog breeding habitat at present is a critical first step in getting ahead of the challenges brought on by climate change.  If future conditions make regular prescribed burning too difficult, other habitat maintenance techniques such as mechanical thinning and removal may need to be employed.


[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).
