---
path: '/habitats/freshwater/2160'
title: 'Ephemeral Ponds and Wetlands'
---

# Ephemeral Ponds and Wetlands

### within Freshwater Non-forested Wetlands

<div id="TopSection">



<div>

### Overall vulnerability:

This habitat was not assessed for vulnerability.



</div>
</div>

## General Information

Ephemeral ponds and wetlands are wet only seasonally or in wet years.  Typically small shallow, usually rounded depression in sand substrate with herbaceous vegetation often in concentric bands.  They occur as isolated wetlands within larger upland ecosystems.  Hydroperiods range widely from as few as 50 days or less to more than 200 days per year.  Typical plants include St. John's wort, spikerush, yellow-eyed grass, chain fern, maidencane, swamp primrose, buttonbush, pickerelweed, arrowheads and bladderwort.  They are of critical importance to many wetland and upland animals.  Fire is important to maintaining this community type by restricting invasion of shrubs and trees and the formation of peat.  Fire frequency is often greatest around the periphery of the marsh and least toward the center.



**TODO: map map (if exists)**

### Species

Frosted Flatwoods salamander, Gopher frog, Marsh brown snake, Reticulated flatwoods salamander, Striped newt

<hr />

## Impacts of Climate Change

Due to the typical shallow structure of ephemeral wetlands, they will be more susceptible to changes in precipitation and temperature, and the combined effect leading to increased evapotranspiration rates. A decrease in precipitation and/or an increase in temperatures will lead to a shorter wet period. This could lead to  interrupted or terminated life stage development of some species, mortality and even local extirpations.  These changes could also lead to the replacement of herbaceous species by woody species. Increased precipitation could permanently connect these isolated wetlands to other water bodies, introducing predators.  For species whose reproductive cycle is linked to wet/dry cycles, changes in the timing and amount of precipitation could affect these life cycle events, potentially causing mismatches of phenological processes, leading to reduced reproductive success, reduced recruitment and increased mortality.



[More information about general climate impacts to ecosystems and habitats in Florida](/impacts/habitats).

### Impacts to Species

Hydroperiod is one of the most important wetland features associated with the presence and species richness of amphibians.  Most pond-breeding amphibians have adaptations to variable hydroperiod conditions; however, if ponds do not hold water for a long enough time during the appropriate season the result can be complete reproductive failure.  The timing of salamander's breeding migration is linked to precipitation and temperature, both of which could be impacted by climate change.  Extended periods of drought, leading to complete pond drying, has led to mortality of mole salamanders.   Gopher frogs are dependent upon proximity of suitable wetlands to upland habitats.  Reduction in the number of ponds and increased distance between ponds and suitable upland habitat due to more frequent and longer dry periods will decrease reproductive success and potentially increase mortality of the gopher frog.

[More information about general climate impacts to species in Florida](/impacts/species).

## Other Non-climate Threats

Incompatible forestry practices, Invasive plants, Roads

## Adaptation Strategies

#### Protection

- Protect buffer zones to allow for future system shifts/migration through easements, acquisition or purchase of development rights.
- Protect critical areas that are naturally positioned to be more resistant/resilient to climate change.
- Preserve the structural complexity and biodiversity of vegetation.
- Identify and protect ecologically significant areas such as breeding/nesting sites, wintering sites, and areas of high species diversity that will continue to serve these functions under climate change.


#### Restoration

- Replace culverts with those designed to accommodate future flow conditions and allow for fish and wildlife passage.
- Replicate habitat types in multiple areas to spread risks associated with climate change.
- Control invasive species in climate-stressed wetlands.
- Practice prescribed fire management to maintain natural conditions.
- Review and revise techniques to maintain or mimic natural disturbance regimes (e.g., what techniques should be used when prescribed fire is no longer feasible).
- Implement best management practices to reduce sources of land-based pollutant and nutrient loads.
- Implement management practices that accommodate shifts in the timing of the rainy season and eliminate or reduce application of pesticides during this period.
- Replace impervious surfaces with permeable pavement to allow runoff to flow through and be temporarily stored prior to discharge, in areas adjacent to wetlands.
- Install pond liners to aid in water retention.


#### Planning

- Beginning with existing management plans, determine the processes and actions needed to increase the resiliency of wetlands and watersheds in the face of climate change.
- Incorporate wetland and climate change ecosystem protection goals into watershed management, water planning, and comprehensive land planning including smart growth, and infrastructure development programs.
- Expand the planning horizons of land use planning to incorporate longer climate predictions.
- Study and better understand and address invasive species in climate-stressed wetlands.


#### Policy

- Manage water demand (through water reuse, recycling, rainwater harvesting, desalination, etc.).
- Create permitting rules that constrain locations for landfills, hazardous waste dumps, mine tailings, and toxic chemical facilities.
- Strengthen control of drainage of wetlands.
- Increase regulatory protection for wetlands most threatened by climate change to reduce stresses, provide opportunity for wetlands to migrate, and protect carbon stores.
- Prevent or limit groundwater extraction from aquifers during periods of drought.


#### Monitoring

- Monitor disease prevalence and occurrence (spatially and temporally).
- Monitor for introductions/increases in invasive species.
- Monitor groundwater table.
- Monitor water quality.
- Establish wetland reference sites to track changes in wetlands due to climate change.
- Evaluate the effectiveness of various land and water management practices in reducing the impact of climate change on wetlands, adapting wetlands to such impacts, or compensating for losses of  acreage or function.


#### Education/Outreach: 

- Collaborate with EPA, Corps of Engineers, Water Management Districts, Department of Environmental Protection to define and address regulatory concerns. Some wetlands may need added protection in light of climate change.
- Collaborate with water managers, including floodplain programs, drinking water programs, and drain engineers and others to consider wetland options for climate strategies.
- Develop focused outreach efforts and materials aimed at local, state, tribal, and federal government authorities involved in water management.
- Develop training on the use of existing and emerging tools for managing wetlands under climate change (e.g., vulnerability and risk assessments, scenario planning, decision support tools, and adaptive management).




[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).


