---
path: '/species/fish/freshwater_fish/304'
title: 'Blackmouth shiner'
---

# Blackmouth shiner
### *Notropis melanostomus*



**Conservation status:** State Threatened

**TODO:vulnerability**

This small, gray fish reaches a body length of only about 1.5 inches.  Blackmouth shiners have large, black eyes and a black stripe that runs along their midsection.  This species has a small range limited to a few river systems in the southern United States.  Breeding occurs in the warmer summer month for this species and blackmouth shiners eat a diet of algae, phytoplankton and small crustaceans.

    
## Habitat Requirements

Bluenose shiners prefer backwaters and streams off the main channel of rivers.

## Climate Impacts

Due to their small geographic range and distinct, isolated populations, blackmouth shiners are especially vulnerable to habitat loss. Their limited habitat is surrounded by heavily populated areas, resulting in negative impacts from pollution and human activity that are likely to worsen as climate change accelerates.  Changes in hydrological cycles including drought and flood events, and increased frequency of strong storms is also a concern for this species.  This threat is also magnified by the fish’s small range –  one or two seasons of intense drought or one extreme disturbance event could result in local extirpation.

## Adaptation Strategies

- Developing sampling programs to gather information on the distribution of this species may inform management decisions in an uncertain future.

- Prioritize key habitat areas that are used by the fish and are less vulnerable to climate change.   As this species is dependent on water quality and temperature, focusing restoration and conservation efforts on the sites with the with the highest likelihood of resilience in a future climate may be an effective strategy.


[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).


## Additional Resources

- [FWC Imperiled Species Management Plan (ISMP)](http://myfwc.com/media/4133167/Floridas-Imperiled-Species-Management-Plan-2016-2026.pdf)

- [FWC Biological Status Review](http://myfwc.com/media/2273265/Blackmouth-Shiner-BSR.pdf)

- [FWC Species Action Plan](http://myfwc.com/media/2738810/Blackmouth-Shiner-Species-Action-Plan-Final-Draft.pdf)
