---
path: '/species/mammals/small_mammals/221'
title: 'Marsh rabbit'
---

# Marsh rabbit
### *Sylvilagus palustris*



**Conservation status:** Not Listed

**TODO:vulnerability**

This small dark brown rabbit is found throughout Florida.  It lacks the fluffy white tail of the more common, eastern cottontail rabbit.  Marsh rabbits have small gray-brown tails.  The marsh rabbit eats a varied diet of herbaceous plants found in and around wetlands.  Marsh rabbits breed year-round with a peak season in the wintertime when they built nests of grass and fur for their young.  The drive to parent is strong in this species- females with go through a pseudo-pregnancy if they mate with an infertile male.  As do many small mammals, these marsh rabbits follow a fast reproductive cycle.  Females will often have 6-7 litters per year and once born, offspring are self-reliant at only 12-15 days.

    
## Habitat Requirements

Strong swimmers, marsh rabbits are usually found close to water.  Glades marsh and mangroves are typical habitat types associated with the species.

## Climate Impacts

The marsh rabbit faces substantial threats related to climate change.  First, sea level rise is a grave impending threat to the rabbit’s coastal habitat.  Hurricanes, storm surge events and flooding can be treacherous for young nestlings.  Additionally, this species faces many of the same existing threats common to coastal species: habitat loss and degradation from coastal development, barriers to migration, habitat disturbance from recreational use and high mortality from non-native predators.

## Adaptation Strategies

- Conservation of existing habitat including partnering with other organizations to reach mutual goals in restoration efforts is an important step in maintaining a healthy population as climate change begins to accelerate.

- Conserving healthy future marsh and mangrove habitats as sea levels rise and human communities begin to shift is important for this species.

- Protecting migratory corridors if mangrove habitat migrates inland and northward is an important adaptation strategy for this species.  Assisted migration to optimal habitat removed from the rabbit’s range in a future climate is a possible strategy.


[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).
