---
path: '/species/birds/shorebirds_seabirds/101'
title: 'American oystercatcher'
---

# American oystercatcher

### Haematopus palliates

<div id="TopSection">



<div>

### Conservation status:

State Threatened

### Overall vulnerability:

Moderate

</div>
</div>

As its name implies, the American oystercatcher inhabits the coastal areas that support intertidal shellfish, with a wide range throughout Florida, Mexico and the Mid-Atlantic.  This species is one of few shorebirds that feeds primarily on mollusks.  Oystercatchers are equipped with strong bills specialized to loosen the adductor muscle responsible for keeping shells tightly closed.  The American oystercatcher’s bright, red-orange bill is also a key identification feature for the species, in addition to a distinct red eye ring set off by a dark black or brown head and backside.  Nesting season extends from March through August.  Oystercatchers are a predominantly ground-nesting species and chicks are mobile immediately after hatching and flight capable at around 35 days.  However, they remain dependent on adults for food for at least two months.

<hr />

## Habitat Requirements

**Total habitat within Florida:** 5,807 hectares (modeled)

American oystercatchers prefer beaches, sandbars, salt marsh, oyster reefs and spoil islands and favor sparse vegetation cover.  Florida supports both a resident breeding population of oystercatchers as well as a large wintering population.

**TODO: habitat crosslinks**

**TODO: habitat map (if exists)**

<hr />

## Climate Impacts

American oystercatcher habitat is expected to become significantly inundated from sea level rise.  Although new habitat may also become available as the sea rises and coastal habitat shifts inland, developed areas may create barriers to habitat migration.  Existing stressors from habitat loss due to coastal development and armoring, predators and disturbance coupled with increasing severe weather events due to climate change pose a concern for this species.  Furthermore, the mollusks on which oystercatchers depend for food are particularly sensitive to changes in water quality due driven by climate change.

[More information about general climate impacts to species in Florida](/impacts/species).


#### This species is expected to be impacted by sea level rise:

- 3 meters of sea level rise: 92% of habitat (5,346 ha)
- 1 meter of sea level rise: 70% of habitat (4,092 ha)

[More information about sea level rise impacts on species in Florida](/impacts/species/slr).
    

<hr />

## Vulnerability Assessment(s)

The overall vulnerability level (Moderate) was based on the following assessment(s).
#### 
<div class="vulnerability-header">
<h3><a href="/impacts/vulnerability/sivva/species">Standardized Index of Vulnerability and Value Assessment</a></h3>
<b class="moderate">Moderately vulnerable</b>
</div> 

The primary factors contributing to vulnerability of the American oystercatcher are sea level rise and erosion.

#### 
<div class="vulnerability-header">
<h3><a href="/impacts/vulnerability/gcva">Gulf Coast Vulnerability Assessment</a></h3>
<b class="high">Highly vulnerable</b>
</div> 

American oystercatcher's vulnerability ranged Gulf-wide form moderate (Texas - Louisiana) to high (Mississippi, Alabama, Florida).  The higher vulnerability in the eastern range is due to the presence of barriers to dispersal, including coastal development and shoreline armoring.  Sea level rise will lead to loss of nesting habitat.  Increased tropical storm frequency or intensity, will negatively impact this species by destruction of nests and erosion of substrate in areas used for nesting and roosting.  Additionally if storms arrive earlier (during nesting season) there would be negative impacts.


<hr />

## Adaptation Strategies

- Develop climate smart practices for beach and coastal management including the use of living shorelines as opposed to hard-armoring for coastal protection wherever possible.  Living shorelines constructed from recycled oyster shells offer a means of creating habitat for oysters and in-turn, oystercatchers.  Oyster reef habitat may be able to naturally increase sediment and provide stabilization for the shoreline at a rate that keeps pace with sea level rise.

- Protect coastal land through fee-simple or easement acquisition of areas serving as natural storm buffers.

- Increase understanding and modeling of expected changes to habitat including expected patterns of inland marsh migration as a tool to prioritize and inform conservation efforts.

[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).

<hr />


## Additional Resources

- [Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission Species Profile](https://myfwc.com/wildlifehabitats/profiles/birds/shorebirdsseabirds/american-oystercatcher/)
