---
path: '/species/birds/shorebirds_seabirds/236'
title: 'Wilson’s plover'
---

# Wilson’s plover
### *Charadrius wilsonia*



**Conservation status:** Species of Greatest Conservation Need

**TODO:vulnerability**

Wilson’s plovers are medium-sized shorebirds, larger than snowy plovers but smaller than killdeers. This bird is found throughout coastal areas in Florida, with breeding populations common in the north part of the state and overwintering birds typically found in the southern peninsula.  The bird’s global range is wide – including much of both North American coasts, the Caribbean and South and Central America. During the spring breeding season, males will perform their courtship rituals before constructing a nest with their mates. The nests are constructed in the bare sand. This bird’s offspring are independent and begin to forage with their parents shortly after hatching.

    
## Habitat Requirements

Wilson’s plovers inhabit beach and surf zones along the coasts.

## Climate Impacts

Changing weather patterns and more extreme temperatures can affect Wilson’s plover migratory patterns. In addition to climatic threats, interaction with human developments and populations can increase the rates of disturbed nests and offspring mortality. Development of coastal areas decreases available habitat for this species in Florida.

## Adaptation Strategies

- Restoration and protection of existing coastal habitat is important for Wilson’s plovers.  As climate change begins to accelerate, protecting areas of future habitat allowing for natural coastal migration not impeded by human development may benefit this species.

- Identifying and restricting human access at known nesting locations is a no-regrets strategy likely to bolster population resilience at the onset of intensifying climate change.

- Controlling nonnative predators such as rat and feral cat populations is likely to benefit this species under the increasing stress of climate change.


[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).
