---
path: '/habitats/coastal/1740'
title: 'Keys Cactus Barren'
---

# Keys Cactus Barren

### within Coastal Uplands

<div id="TopSection">



<div>

### Overall vulnerability:

<div class="vulnerability vulnerability-extreme">Very High</div>

### Area:

-   5 hectares within Florida (modeled)

-   1 hectares (16%) is located on public lands



</div>
</div>

## General Information

Keys cactus barren is an ecotonal community occurring along rocky coastlines in the Florida keys, found on only six sites.  Generally characterized as flat rocklands with exposed limestone.  This community is sparsely vegetated with stunted halophytic shrubs, cacti, algae and herbs.   Plants in this community are adapted to high isolation levels, salt spray, occasional inundations by saltwater, and other tropical marine influences. Typical plants include white mangrove, black mangrove, red mangrove, buttonwood, sea grape, bay cedar, lantana, nickerbean, glasswort, railroad vine, sea oxeye, prickly pear cactus, Spanish bayonet, and saltwort.



**TODO: map map (if exists)**



<hr />

## Impacts of Climate Change

The Keys cactus barren is at high risk of complete habitat loss, with 100% of the current area likely to be inundated by a 1 m rise in sea level.  The plants found here are already highly adapted to isolated patches and high salinity levels.  However, due to the isolated and patchy nature of this community and its association with flat exposed limestone, it is not likely that it will be able to successfully migrate inland to new suitable sites as sea levels rise.


#### This habitat is expected to be impacted by sea level rise:

- 3 meters of sea level rise: 100% of area (5 ha)
- 1 meter of sea level rise: 100% of area (5 ha)
    

[More information about general climate impacts to ecosystems and habitats in Florida](/impacts/habitats).

### Impacts to Species

Species found on  these isolated sites may be significantly impacted if they are not able to move to other sites as the keys cactus barren is reduced/lost due to sea level rise.  This community is known more for its uniqueness and rare plant species.  Sites are threatened by encroachment of woody species and invasion by Brazilian pepper.

[More information about general climate impacts to species in Florida](/impacts/species).

## Other Non-climate Threats

Incompatible recreational activities, Invasive animals, Invasive plants

## Adaptation Strategies

#### Monitoring

- Conduct surveys to detect new infestations of invasive species and presence of new species.
- Monitor species diversity and habitat transition over time in response to sea level rise and changing climatological conditions.


#### Education/Outreach

- Work with volunteers to control invasive species.
- Work with communities and landowners to choose native vegetation in favor of non-native vegetation.
- Provide education and incentives for neighboring landowners to reduce critical invasive plants and assist in detection of new species.
- Work with local communities to remove dumped debris, e.g., construction materials, landscape debris, automobile parts, trash.


#### Policy

- Reduce public access to areas as they become stressed/impacted by climate change and more susceptible to non-climate stressors.
- Provide greater regulation and enforcement of recreational use and access restrictions.


#### Planning

- Incorporate climate change considerations into new and future revisions of species and area management plans.
- Plan timing of restoration activities to avoid impacts on rare species during critical life history phases and during times of increased stress due to impacts from climate change.
- Identify areas particularly vulnerable to loss or transition under climate change and develop management strategies and approaches for adaptation.


#### Restoration

- Remove existing invasive species.
- Remove new invasive species before they become established.


#### Protection

- Develop ex-situ living collections of unique/endemic plant species with partners such as botanic gardens and arboreta.
- Consider relocating rare species to higher elevation areas when critical populations may be affected by impacts from sea level rise (e.g., inundation, increased soil salinity).
- Reduce or eliminate mosquito spraying on and adjacent to keys cactus barrens..
- Preserve remaining keys cactus barrens and buffers that will enhance species migration corridors.




[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).

## Additional Resources

 - [Florida Natural Areas Inventory Profile](http://www.fnai.org/PDF/NC/Keys_Cactus_Barren_Final_2010.pdf)
