---
path: '/habitats/terrestrial/1831'
title: 'Working Lands - Low Intensity'
---

# Working Lands - Low Intensity

### within Working Lands (Disturbed)

<div id="TopSection">



<div>

### Overall vulnerability:

This habitat was not assessed for vulnerability.

### Area:

-   2,368,234 hectares within Florida (modeled)

-   411,982 hectares (17%) is located on public lands



</div>
</div>

## General Information

Working lands 1  includes altered land types that typically still provide habitat for fish and wildlife, depending on intensity of land use and type of management activities.  Oak-cabbage palm forests are characterized by a closed canopy of hardwood species, primarily Live Oak and Cabbage Palm, that are naturally protected from fire by its position on the landscape.  This community has been heavily impacted by human activity, primarily clearing for agriculture and urbanization.  Unimproved/Woodland pasture includes cleared or forest land with major stands of trees and brush where native grasses have been allowed to develop. Normally, this land will not be managed with brush control and/or fertilizer application.  Hardwood plantations  are artificially generated by planting seedling stock or seeds. Industrial and commercial pine plantations are almost exclusively artificially produced through silviculture practices. Due to a climate conducive to rapid growth, Florida is part of one of the most productive timber-producing regions in the world. Florida’s timberlands are a major contributor to the state’s economy and provide critical water recharge areas within Florida. Industrial/Commercial Pineland habitat is characterized by high density, even-aged, single-species stands, planted in rows at regular intervals, across large areas. This habitat includes sites predominantly planted to slash pine, although longleaf pine and loblolly pine tracts also occur. Also included in this category are sand pine plantations, which often are planted on sites with poorer soils; many of these areas occur on intensively prepared sites.

Includes: Oak-Cabbage Palm Forests, Unimproved/Woodland Pasture,  Hardwood Plantation, and Coniferous Plantation

**TODO: map map (if exists)**

### Species

Audubon's crested caracara, Eastern indigo snake, Florida black bear, Painted bunting, Southeastern American kestrel

<hr />

## Impacts of Climate Change

In addition to contributions to Florida's economy, production forestry provides ecosystems services, such as regulation of water quantity and quality, wildlife habitat, and carbon sequestration.  Increased temperatures and modest increases in precipitation will result in substantial increases in potential loblolly pine and slash pine productivity. Forestry is unique in that it is one of few industries that sequesters more carbon than it emits.  There will be opportunities to increase carbon sequestration by retention or expansion of forested areas and/or employing alternative forest management practices.  The use of prescribed fire as a management tool may be more challenging in the future, while alternative tools (e.g., mechanical, chemical) may need to be used more often.  Altered fire regimes and the increased use of alternative management techniques may impact forest suitability for various species.  Increased summer and winter minimum temperatures, as well as extreme events (e.g., droughts, floods) will enhance invasive species processes, from introduction through establishment and expansion.  Warmer winter air temperatures will increase over-wintering Southern pine beetle larva survival rate, and higher annual air temperatures will allow the beetles to produce more generations per year. Severe drought stress reduces resin production and greatly increases the susceptibility of trees to beetle infestation.   Increased temperatures, decreased precipitation, along with increased stress of tress will lead to an increase in the frequency and intensity of wildfires. Increased temperatures will promote the growth of some forage crops but decrease the nutrient availability.


#### This habitat is expected to be impacted by sea level rise:

- 3 meters of sea level rise: 4% of area (101,071 ha)
- 1 meter of sea level rise: <1% of area (19,738 ha)
    

[More information about general climate impacts to ecosystems and habitats in Florida](/impacts/habitats).

### Impacts to Species

Changes to the extent and level of connectivity of tree plantations due to impacts from climate change (e.g., altered fire regime, tree mortality) or more intensive forestry management practices in response to the impacts of climate change will affect multiple species.  Increased fragmentation will lead to loss of habitat and loss of key corridors for species. Several types of working landscapes can provide the appropriate mix of nesting and foraging habitat for Florida sandhill cranes.  The suitability of the shallow wetlands for nesting will be impacted if timing and amount of precipitation changes, leading to a decrease in reproductive success.  If wetlands are too dry during nesting they would not provide adequate habitat or if they dry during the incubation period it would allow for increased nest predation by terrestrial predators.  If precipitation increases during the nesting season the nest will flood, leading to nest failure. Audubon's crested caracara's territory usually includes open pasture or ranchland and embedded wetlands surrounding  clumps of cabbage palm.  As impacts form climate change occur, the availability of these components in the appropriate matrix could be altered.  Additionally, suitable caracara habitat may be lost if land use type is shifted to more intensive agricultural operations or converted to residential/commercial development in response to climate change.

[More information about general climate impacts to species in Florida](/impacts/species).

## Other Non-climate Threats

Conversion to commercial and industrial development, Conversion to housing and urban development,  Conversion to more intensive agriculture, Conversion to recreation areas, Groundwater withdrawal, Incompatible forestry practices, Invasive plants, Roads, Surface water withdrawal

## Adaptation Strategies

#### Policy

- Review and update Best Management Practices to accommodate current and future conditions.
- Manage water demand (through water reuse, recycling, rainwater harvesting, desalination, etc.).
- Prevent or limit groundwater extraction from aquifers during periods of drought.
- Develop expanded cost-share payments for private landowners through state and federal cooperative forest programs for reforestation.


#### Education/Outreach

- Work with entities such as resource conservation districts, cooperative extensions, and other silvicultural/agricultural organizations to introduce adaptation techniques.
- Increase coordination between the private sector and local to federal governmental agencies on drought planning and drought-related policies.
- Work with landowners to reduce stormwater runoff/erosion.
- Educate landowners on importance of habitat preservation (including serving as hazard buffers), climate change and incorporation into long range planning efforts.
- Develop education materials for landowners on the importance of phenology factors, how they may change over time given climate change impacts, and how they relate to regulations/closures.
- Actively engage with landowners to minimize urban encroachment and amount/placement of impervious surfaces.


#### Monitoring

- Monitor for signs of beetle outbreaks.
- Enhance invasive species monitoring.
- Monitor for increases in pests/diseases.
- Document changes in vegetation structure and composition to track climate change effects.
- Monitor and correct for any point source or non-point source pollution.
- Evaluate the effectiveness of various land management practices in reducing the impact of climate change.


#### Planning

- Incorporate fire risk into land use planning.
- Incorporate climate change considerations into new and future revisions of land management plans.
- Identify areas particularly vulnerable to loss or transition under climate change and develop management strategies and approaches for adaptation.
- Conduct a predictive assessment of current and potential invasive species ranges and impacts.
- Assess and take steps to reduce risks of facilitating movement of “new” undesirable non-native species, pests, and pathogens.


#### Restoration

- Increase water storage capacity.
- Remove or minimize invasive species.
- Switch to more heat/drought/salinity tolerant species.
- Reduce forest density.
- Evaluate fire management techniques, adjust in response to climate change impacts.
- Restore/enhance riparian corridors.
- Promote forest and ranchland management practices that reduce erosion.
- Restore hydrology and embedded wetlands (promote water retention on-site).
- Minimize use of herbicides/pesticides near wetlands and water bodies.
- Manage fuel loads to reduce fire severity.


#### Protection

- Provide landowners and stakeholder groups with incentives for conservation and restoration of key corridors that will provide connectivity under current and future conditions.
- Maintain habitat quality to enhance the resilience to changing conditions.
- Encourage landowner cost share programs and enrollment in conservation easements to increase habitat base.
- Leave riparian corridors natural.




[More information about adaptation strategies](/strategies).


